Installing
----------

Before compiling Tile World, ensure that you have SDL installed on
your machine. (If you don't have SDL, you can get it by visiting
http://www.libsdl.org/download-1.2.html. If you download a precompiled
version -- i.e., an .rpm or .deb file -- note that you will need the
development runtime, as opposed to the binary runtime.)

By default, the program is set up so that it will look for your .dat
files in /usr/local/share/tworld. If you would rather have it look
somewhere else, you can change the line near the top of the Makefile
from:
	CFLAGS += '-DDATADIR="/usr/local/share/tworld"'
to:
	CFLAGS += '-DDATADIR="/some/other/place"'
(You can also specify a different directory at runtime, either on the
command line or via the TWORLDDATADIR environment variable; however,
setting an appropriate default value is easier in the long run.) In
any case, this directory should contain nothing besides your Chip's
Challenge .dat file(s).

Now, run make and build the binary. There shouldn't be any serious
warnings from the compiler. If (and only if) you want to be able to
run Tile World under SVGAlib, you will need to make the binary
root-owned and set-userid. (However, note that the SDL library's
support for SVGAlib is still a bit primitive. On my machine it looks
awful -- the screen is updated directly, without waiting for a
vertical retrace. I will probably add an SVGAlib-specific port back in
later that is independent of SDL, but for now I recommend sticking
with X.)

Then run "make install" as root, or just manually copy the tworld
binary to an appropriate location.

N.B.: If you have any files of saved games left over from a pre-alpha
version, delete them. (The files will be in ~/.chips, unless you
specified a different directory.) Not only has the file format
changed, but the pseudorandom-number generator code has been altered,
and the walkers will not follow the same movements as they did when
your games were recorded. (Next time I change the saved-game file
format, I will write a converter so that you don't have to keep
replacing them.)

mklynxcc
--------

Finally, a very simple command-line utility is included, namely
mklynxcc. Run "make mklynxcc" to build it. This program will change a
normal .dat file to one that is marked as using the Lynx ruleset. You
can copy a .dat file and run this utility on the copy to see how the
levels work with the Lynx ruleset. When you run this utility on your a
copy of your chips.dat file, include the -x option. This will have the
added effect on the .dat file of restoring the wall on level 88 that
Microsoft removed (if your chips.dat is one of those with a removed
wall), and will also fix the four passwords that were changed from the
original Lynx codes.
